feat: Add quick start guide (#220)
event-driven-io/emmett: src/docs/quick-start.md

```

```sh [yarn]
yarn add @event-driven-io/emmett
```

```sh [bun]
bun add @event-driven-io/emmett
```

:::

## Writing a simple shopping cart application

Let us write a simple shopping cart application using the four basic building blocks in Emmett: _Commands_, _command handlers_, _events_ and the _event store_.

### Defining the shopping cart

First open the `index.ts` file that we created previously. Then let us define a type for how our shopping cart should look like:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#state-definition

### Create the initial state

We cannot start from just anywhere. That is why we need a function that returns the initial state of our shopping cart:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#initial-state

This creates a new empty shopping cart

### Commands

Commands are instructions to the application to perform a certain operation like _Add item to shopping cart_!

Our application needs to perform the following operations:

- Add item: Add an item by its name
- Remove item: Remove an item by its name

Let us first create a command to add an item in `index.ts` and another to remove one:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#commands

> This declares a command whose type is `AddItem` (or `RemiveUten`) and whose payload has a `name` property of type `string`. This `name` property specifies the name of the item that should be added to or removed from the cart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This declares a command whose type is `AddItem` (or `RemoveItem`) and whose payload has a `name` property of type `string`. This `name` property specifies the item's name that should be added to or removed from the cart.
```

Last but not least, we define a type `ShoppingCartCommand` that accomodates all commands. This way we can easily extend the list of possible commands using union types without having to change the code in other places.

> [!NOTE]

> > The command is only a _request_ to perform the operation, e.g. to add an item to the cart. Depending on the outcome, this request can be successful or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The command is only an _intention_ to perform the operation, e.g. to add an item to the cart. Depending on the outcome, this request can be successful or not.
```

### Events

_Events_ record that something happened in the past, e.g. `item was added to shopping cart`. They are immutable facts that _cannot be changed anymore_.

Before we can put things together, we need to define our _item added_ event. Also we define a `ShoppingCartEvent` type to accomodate all events:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#events

We use this type to record that our item has been added to (or removed from) the shopping cart.

### Recording events

Now we need to put the commands and events together using _command handler_ functions:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#state-definition

This function is responsible for deciding the outcome of the command using business rules (e.g. items may not be added more than once). Currently there are none, so we simply pass the name using the `data.name` property of the `command`.

> Emmett promotes the following _decider_ pattern that is easily extensible for more commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can group all commands into a unified function that is easily extensible when you add more commands:
```

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#decider

> This calls the correct _command handler_ function based on the `type` of the command and returns an event which is going to be _recorded_ to the event store further below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This calls the correct _command handler_ function based on the command's `type`  and returns an event (or an array of events) that will be recorded and stored in the event store further below.
```

### Calculating the next shopping cart

Finally we need to _evolve_ our shopping cart. Given a current state (items) of the shopping cart, we add or remove items based on the `name` in the event. The pattern is pretty similar to the decider pattern, except that we take an shopping cart and an event to compute the next state:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#evolve

Finally we can declare the _command handler_ itself:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#handle

### Putting it all together with an event store

> The _Event Store_ records a series of all the events that occurred in our application, similar to a cassette tape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _Event Store_ is logically a key-value database that records a series of events that happened in our application. It logically groups events in streams. In the traditional approach, a stream represents a record. Each instance of the process or entity will have its own stream. That means that it also has its own ID, and the value is a sequence of events recorded for this process or entity (e.g., all the events for a certain shopping cart).
```

> Starting from the initial state, it collates all events using the `evolve` function (basically left reducing the event stream).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from the initial state, it folds all events using the `evolve` function (basically left reducing the event stream).
```

ItemRemoved(name: Ice Cream) // ShoppingCart(items: Pizza)
```

These events are stored inside the `EventStore`. Emmett provides several implementations of event stores. For simplicity we use the _in-memory event store_:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#event-store

Next let us define a few example commands:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#example-commands

We can pass these to the `handle` function that we previously defined and use our decider for "routing" the commands to the correct methods:

<<< @/snippets/quickStart/index.ts#handle-example-commands

This results in the following output:

```ts
ItemAdded(name: Pizza) // ShoppingCart(items: Pizza)
---
ItemAdded(name: Pizza) // ShoppingCart(items: Pizza)
ItemAdded(name: Ice Cream) // ShoppingCart(items: Pizza, Ice Cream)
---
ItemAdded(name: Pizza) // ShoppingCart(items: Pizza)
ItemAdded(name: Ice Cream) // ShoppingCart(items: Pizza, Ice Cream)
ItemRemoved(name: Ice Cream) // ShoppingCart(items: Pizza)
```

Why does it look that way?
Initially there is only one event in the stream, then two, then three, then four. Whenever an event is appended to the stream, _the whole stream is re-read_ to calculate the next state.

> One key aspect is that this behavior allows us to change the code for calculating the current state of the shopping cart (e.g. to just count the number of items in the cart) without any negative side effects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One key aspect is that this behavior allows us to change the code for building the current state of the shopping cart (e.g. to just count the number of items in the cart) without any negative side effects.
```

```

The output should look like this:

```text
Created a new tsconfig.json with:

  target: es2016
  module: commonjs
  strict: true
  esModuleInterop: true
  skipLibCheck: true
  forceConsistentCasingInFileNames: true

You can learn more at https://aka.ms/tsconfig
```

Then add the `build:ts` and `build:ts:watch` targets to your package.json:

```json{7-8}
{
  "name": "emmet-quick-start",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "dist/index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "build:ts": "tsc",
    "build:ts:watch": "tsc -b --watch"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "devDependencies": {
    "@types/node": "^22.13.10",
    "typescript": "^5.8.2"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "@event-driven-io/emmett": "^0.34.0"
  }
}
```

Let us add an empty `index.ts` file as entrypoint for our application:

```sh
touch index.ts
```

> [!NOTE]
> In real-life applications, we might want to consider improving the project structure later on. However premature optimization is the root of all evil, so let us start simple and evolve later.

Test your configuration by running

::: code-group

```sh [npm]
npm run build:ts
```

```text [View output]
$ npm run build:ts

> > emmet-quick-start@1.0.0 build:ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> emmett-quick-start@1.0.0 build:ts
```

```

```sh [pnpm]
pnpm add @event-driven-io/emmett
```

```sh [yarn]
yarn add @event-driven-io/emmett
```

```sh [bun]
bun add @event-driven-io/emmett
```

:::

## Writing a simple counter application

Let us write a simple counter application using the four basic building blocks in Emmett: _Commands_, _command handlers_, _events_ and the _event store_.

### Defining the counter

Let us define how our counter should look like:

```ts
type Counter = {
  value: number;
};
```

### Create the initial state

We cannot start from just anywhere. That is why we need a function that returns the initial state of our counter:

```ts
export function initialState(): Counter {
  return {
    value: 0,
  };
}
```

Now the counter starts with `value = 0`.`

### Commands

Commands\_ are instructions to the application to perform a certain operation like \_Increment counter!

Our application needs to perform the following operations:

- Increment the counter
- Decrement the counter

Let us first create a command to increment the counter in `index.ts` and another to decrement it:

```ts
import type { Command } from '@event-driven-io/emmett';

// Command<type, payload>

> export type IncrementCounter = Command<

Reviewer: **FIX:** @tburny, could you use a similar events as in the getting started? I think that if you use simplified ProductItemAdded and ProductItemRemoved, then it'll still be simple enough; you could model a counter of product items, but it'd give already some more real-world examples.

Author: I need to try this out. Actually I adapted the example from the bun test, as it was super short and simple.

However I see the added value when it comes to explaining the advantages of Event Sourcing: https://github.com/AxonIQ/reference-guide/blob/master/architecture-overview/event-sourcing.md

Reviewer: Yup, it doesn't have to be a full-blown tutorial, as we have in getting started, but something that can give a more relatable hook for ideas, or put a seed :)

Author: I changed it to a shopping cart :)

Last but not least, we define a type `CounterCommand` that accomodates all commands. This way we can easily extend the list of possible commands using union types without having to change the code in other places.

> [!NOTE]
> The command is only a _request_ to increment the counter (perform the operation). Depending on the outcome, this request can be successful or not.

### Events

_Events_ record that something happened in the past, e.g. `counter incremented`. They are immutable facts that _cannot be changed anymore_.

Before we can put things together, we need to define our _counter incremented_ event. Also we define a `CounterEvent` type to accomodate all events:

```ts
import type { Event } from '@event-driven-io/emmett';

export type CounterIncremented = Event<
  'CounterIncremented',
  {
    by: number;
  }
>;

export type CounterDecremented = Event<
  'CounterDecremented',
  {
    by: number;
  }
>;

// Union type of all possible counter events (for later)
export type CounterEvent = CounterIncremented | CounterDecremented;
```

We use this type to record that our counter has been incremented (or decremented) by the amount in the `by` property.

> ### Turning commands into events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recording events
```

Author: Done
